27. Vehicles designated for emergency duties. - (1) The driver of a vehicle designated by the State Government for emergency services under sub-rule (4) of rule 108 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 including a vehicle used as ambulance or for fire-fighting or for salvage purposes or a police vehicle, shall operate the multi-toned horn (siren) and the multi-coloured light with flasher only when the vehicle is responding to an emergency call or an alarm.

(2) An emergency vehicle, while its multi-toned hornand the flasher is on, shall have the right of way over all the other vehicles.

(3) In a case of utmost emergency like saving a human life, warding off serious damage to health of a person, prevent commission of a crime or damage to essential services or fight a fire, the driver of the emergency vehicle with the multi-toned horn and the multi-coloured flasher operating may, with utmost care, responsibility and caution-

i. cross a red traffic light;

ii. exceed the specified speed limit;

iii. drive on a highway hard shoulder; and

iv. drive in either direction on a "NO ENTRY" or a "One Way" street.
(4) The priority within the emergency vehicles as referred in sub-regulation (1) shall be as follows-

v. first, a fire service vehicle;
vi. second, an ambulance;
vii. third, a police service vehicle; and
viii. fourth, any other vehicle designated by the State Government as an emergency management vehicle such as for maintenance of essential public services like water and power supply or public transport.

(5) When an emergency vehicle, with its multi-toned horn and light flasher on, is overtaking, approaching or entering the path of any other vehicle, the person driving or riding such other vehicle shall, unless otherwise directed by a police officer-

(a) yield the right of way to the emergency vehicle, by driving to the left as close as practicable to the kerb or edge of the roadway in the shortest possible time;

(b) stop, if required, and remain stationary in that position until the emergency vehicle has passed.
(6) The driver shall, unless otherwise directed by the crew of the emergency vehicle, maintain a distance of at least fifty meters from the emergency vehicle on which multi-toned hornor flasher lights or both are operating.

(7) A road maintenance or public utility maintenance vehicle may be parked on the roadway, if necessary, after switching on the hazard warning lights and placing a warning device with necessary information at least fifty meters behind the parked vehicle, and take all other precautions to ensure safety of other road users.
